Cambridge International AS & A Level
PHYSICS 9702/51
Paper 5 Planning, Analysis and Evaluation May/June 2021
MARK SCHEME
Maximum Mark: 30
Published
This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the
examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the
details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have
considered the acceptability of alternative answers.
Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for
Teachers.
Cambridge International will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes.
Cambridge International is publishing the mark schemes for the May/June 2021 series for most Cambridge
IGCSE™, Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components.
This document consists of 10 printed pages.
© UCLES 2021 [Turn over
9702/51 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme May/June 2021
PUBLISHED
Generic Marking Principles
These general marking principles must be applied by all examiners when marking candidate answers. They should be applied alongside the
specific content of the mark scheme or generic level descriptors for a question. Each question paper and mark scheme will also comply with these
marking principles.
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 1:
Marks must be awarded in line with:
• the specific content of the mark scheme or the generic level descriptors for the question
• the specific skills defined in the mark scheme or in the generic level descriptors for the question
• the standard of response required by a candidate as exemplified by the standardisation scripts.
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 2:
Marks awarded are always whole marks (not half marks, or other fractions).
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 3:
Marks must be awarded positively:
• marks are awarded for correct/valid answers, as defined in the mark scheme. However, credit is given for valid answers which go beyond the
scope of the syllabus and mark scheme, referring to your Team Leader as appropriate
• marks are awarded when candidates clearly demonstrate what they know and can do
• marks are not deducted for errors
• marks are not deducted for omissions
• answers should only be judged on the quality of spelling, punctuation and grammar when these features are specifically assessed by the
question as indicated by the mark scheme. The meaning, however, should be unambiguous.
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 4:
Rules must be applied consistently, e.g. in situations where candidates have not followed instructions or in the application of generic level
descriptors.
© UCLES 2021 Page 2 of 10
9702/51 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme May/June 2021
PUBLISHED
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 5:
Marks should be awarded using the full range of marks defined in the mark scheme for the question (however; the use of the full mark range may
be limited according to the quality of the candidate responses seen).
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 6:
Marks awarded are based solely on the requirements as defined in the mark scheme. Marks should not be awarded with grade thresholds or
grade descriptors in mind.
Science-Specific Marking Principles
1 Examiners should consider the context and scientific use of any keywords when awarding marks. Although keywords may be present, marks
should not be awarded if the keywords are used incorrectly.
2 The examiner should not choose between contradictory statements given in the same question part, and credit should not be awarded for any
correct statement that is contradicted within the same question part. Wrong science that is irrelevant to the question should be ignored.
3 Although spellings do not have to be correct, spellings of syllabus terms must allow for clear and unambiguous separation from other syllabus
terms with which they may be confused (e.g. ethane / ethene, glucagon / glycogen, refraction / reflection).
4 The error carried forward (ecf) principle should be applied, where appropriate. If an incorrect answer is subsequently used in a scientifically
correct way, the candidate should be awarded these subsequent marking points. Further guidance will be included in the mark scheme where
necessary and any exceptions to this general principle will be noted.
5 ‘List rule’ guidance
For questions that require n responses (e.g. State two reasons …):
• The response should be read as continuous prose, even when numbered answer spaces are provided.
• Any response marked ignore in the mark scheme should not count towards n.
• Incorrect responses should not be awarded credit but will still count towards n.
• Read the entire response to check for any responses that contradict those that would otherwise be credited. Credit should not be
awarded for any responses that are contradicted within the rest of the response. Where two responses contradict one another, this
should be treated as a single incorrect response.
• Non-contradictory responses after the first n responses may be ignored even if they include incorrect science.
© UCLES 2021 Page 3 of 10
9702/51 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme May/June 2021
PUBLISHED
6 Calculation specific guidance
Correct answers to calculations should be given full credit even if there is no working or incorrect working, unless the question states ‘show
your working’.
For questions in which the number of significant figures required is not stated, credit should be awarded for correct answers when rounded by
the examiner to the number of significant figures given in the mark scheme. This may not apply to measured values.
For answers given in standard form (e.g. a × 10n) in which the convention of restricting the value of the coefficient (a) to a value between 1
and 10 is not followed, credit may still be awarded if the answer can be converted to the answer given in the mark scheme.
Unless a separate mark is given for a unit, a missing or incorrect unit will normally mean that the final calculation mark is not awarded.
Exceptions to this general principle will be noted in the mark scheme.
7 Guidance for chemical equations
Multiples / fractions of coefficients used in chemical equations are acceptable unless stated otherwise in the mark scheme.
State symbols given in an equation should be ignored unless asked for in the question or stated otherwise in the mark scheme.
© UCLES 2021 Page 4 of 10
9702/51 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme May/June 2021
PUBLISHED
Annotations
 Correct point
Method of analysis marks in Question 1
 Additional detail marks in Question 1
1–10
X Incorrect point
^ Omission
BOD Benefit of the doubt
NBOD No benefit of the doubt given
ECF Error carried forward
P Defining the problem marks in Question 1
Power of ten error in Question 2
M0 Methods of data collection marks in Question 1
SF Incorrect number of significant figures
© UCLES 2021 Page 5 of 10
9702/51 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme May/June 2021
PUBLISHED
Question Answer Marks
1 Defining the problem
R is the independent variable and t is the dependent variable or vary R and measure t 1
keep the number of turns on the coil/N constant 1
Methods of data collection
labelled diagram or correct symbols including: 1
• labelled (d.c.) power supply
• switch in series with power supply, resistor and coil
• complete workable circuit
circuit diagram to measure R, e.g. ammeter and voltmeter correctly positioned or R connected to ohmmeter with no other 1
connections (not ohmmeter in main circuit)
method to determine t (of a few milliseconds) e.g. use (storage) oscilloscope or current/voltage sensor connected to 1
datalogger/computer
method to determine A, e.g. micrometer/calipers to determine diameter of coil and A = πd2/4 1
Method of analysis
plot a graph of t against 1 / R 1
(allow log t against log R)
relationship valid if a straight line passing through the origin is produced 1
(allow gradient = –1 for graph of log t against log R)
gradient×L 1
K = .
AN2
© UCLES 2021 Page 6 of 10
9702/51 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme May/June 2021
PUBLISHED
Question Answer Marks
1 Additional detail including safety considerations 6
D1 open switch/switch off (high voltage) circuit before changing the resistor/touching components or
ensure no bare wires/use shrouded connectors
D2 wear (insulating) gloves to prevent electric shock/electrocution
D3 keep A and L constant
D4 use ruler/calipers to measure L
D5 repeat measurements of diameter in different directions/at points along the coil and average
D6 method to determine R e.g. R = V / I linked to correct circuit diagram for ammeter/voltmeter method or measure
resistance using ohmmeter
D7 repeat experiment for each value of R and average t
D8 method to determine t:
use of time-base from oscilloscope explained
or
use of time axis of output from data logger/computer explained
D9 use smaller values of R to increase I
D10 reduce L or increase N or increase A to increase t
© UCLES 2021 Page 7 of 10
9702/51 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme May/June 2021
PUBLISHED
Question Answer Marks
2(a) 1 1
gradient =
uA
1
y-intercept =
u
2(b) 1
1
(M + m) / g / s cm–1
v
380 0.226 or 0.2262
480 0.255 or 0.2551
580 0.294 or 0.2941
680 0.331 or 0.3311
830 0.388 or 0.3876
930 0.429 or 0.4292
1
Values of (M + m) and as shown above.
v
Absolute uncertainties in (M + m) from ± (19 or 20) to ± (46.5 or 47 or 50). 1
2(c)(i) Six points plotted correctly. 1
Must be accurate to the nearest half a small square. Diameter of points must be less than half a small square.
Error bars in (M + m) plotted correctly. 1
All error bars must be plotted. Total length of bar must be accurate to less than half a small square and symmetrical.
© UCLES 2021 Page 8 of 10
9702/51 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme May/June 2021
PUBLISHED
Question Answer Marks
2(c)(ii) Line of best fit drawn covers all points. 1
Points must be balanced. Do not allow line from top point to bottom point.
Line must pass between (425, 0.240) and (440, 0.240) and between (850, 0.400) and (865, 0.400).
Worst acceptable line drawn (steepest or shallowest possible line that passes through all error bars). 1
All error bars must be plotted.
2(c)(iii) Gradient determined with clear substitution of data points into Δy / Δx. 1
Distance between data points must be at least half the length of the drawn line.
Gradient of worst acceptable line determined. 1
uncertainty = (gradient of line of best fit – gradient of worst acceptable line)
or
uncertainty = ½ (steepest worst line gradient – shallowest worst line gradient)
2(c)(iv) y-intercept determined by substitution of correct point into y = mx + c. 1
y-intercept of worst acceptable line determined by substitution into y = mx + c. 1
uncertainty = (y-intercept of line of best fit – y-intercept of worst acceptable line)
or
uncertainty = ½ (steepest worst line y-intercept – shallowest worst line y-intercept)
Do not allow ECF from false origin method.
2(d)(i) u determined using y-intercept and u and A given to two or three significant figures. 1
1
u =
y-intercept
A determined using gradient with correct substitution and units with correct power of ten for u and A. 1
y-intercept 1
A= or A=
gradient u× gradient
© UCLES 2021 Page 9 of 10
9702/51 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme May/June 2021
PUBLISHED
Question Answer Marks
2(d)(ii) Percentage uncertainty in A determined, e.g. 1
Δgradient Δy-intercept
percentage uncertainty in A=  + 
 gradient y-intercept 
or
Δu clearly determined using the value of u and
Δgradient Δu
percentage uncertainty in A=  + ×100
 gradient u 
or
correct substitution for max/min methods e.g.
1
maxA=
minu×min gradient
1
minA=
maxu×max gradient
2(e) Value of m determined from (d)(i) or (c)(iii) and (c)(iv), with correct number substitution and correct power of ten. 1
A×u
( )
m= − 330+A
2
or
0.5−y-intercept
m = −330
gradient
© UCLES 2021 Page 10 of 10
