Cambridge International AS & A Level
PHYSICS 9702/52
Paper 5 Planning, Analysis and Evaluation February/March 2024
MARK SCHEME
Maximum Mark: 30
Published
This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the
examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the
details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have
considered the acceptability of alternative answers.
Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for
Teachers.
Cambridge International will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes.
Cambridge International is publishing the mark schemes for the February/March 2024 series for most
Cambridge IGCSE, Cambridge International A and AS Level components, and some Cambridge O Level
components.
This document consists of 9 printed pages.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2024 [Turn over
9702/52 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme February/March 2024
PUBLISHED
Generic Marking Principles
These general marking principles must be applied by all examiners when marking candidate answers. They should be applied alongside the
specific content of the mark scheme or generic level descriptions for a question. Each question paper and mark scheme will also comply with these
marking principles.
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 1:
Marks must be awarded in line with:
• the specific content of the mark scheme or the generic level descriptors for the question
• the specific skills defined in the mark scheme or in the generic level descriptors for the question
• the standard of response required by a candidate as exemplified by the standardisation scripts.
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 2:
Marks awarded are always whole marks (not half marks, or other fractions).
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 3:
Marks must be awarded positively:
• marks are awarded for correct/valid answers, as defined in the mark scheme. However, credit is given for valid answers which go beyond
the scope of the syllabus and mark scheme, referring to your Team Leader as appropriate
• marks are awarded when candidates clearly demonstrate what they know and can do
• marks are not deducted for errors
• marks are not deducted for omissions
• answers should only be judged on the quality of spelling, punctuation and grammar when these features are specifically assessed by the
question as indicated by the mark scheme. The meaning, however, should be unambiguous.
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 4:
Rules must be applied consistently, e.g. in situations where candidates have not followed instructions or in the application of generic level
descriptors.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2024 Page 2 of 9
9702/52 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme February/March 2024
PUBLISHED
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 5:
Marks should be awarded using the full range of marks defined in the mark scheme for the question (however; the use of the full mark range may
be limited according to the quality of the candidate responses seen).
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 6:
Marks awarded are based solely on the requirements as defined in the mark scheme. Marks should not be awarded with grade thresholds or
grade descriptors in mind.
Science-Specific Marking Principles
1 Examiners should consider the context and scientific use of any keywords when awarding marks. Although keywords may be present, marks
should not be awarded if the keywords are used incorrectly.
2 The examiner should not choose between contradictory statements given in the same question part, and credit should not be awarded for
any correct statement that is contradicted within the same question part. Wrong science that is irrelevant to the question should be ignored.
3 Although spellings do not have to be correct, spellings of syllabus terms must allow for clear and unambiguous separation from other
syllabus terms with which they may be confused (e.g. ethane / ethene, glucagon / glycogen, refraction / reflection).
4 The error carried forward (ecf) principle should be applied, where appropriate. If an incorrect answer is subsequently used in a scientifically
correct way, the candidate should be awarded these subsequent marking points. Further guidance will be included in the mark scheme
where necessary and any exceptions to this general principle will be noted.
5 ‘List rule’ guidance
For questions that require n responses (e.g. State two reasons …):
• The response should be read as continuous prose, even when numbered answer spaces are provided.
• Any response marked ignore in the mark scheme should not count towards n.
• Incorrect responses should not be awarded credit but will still count towards n.
• Read the entire response to check for any responses that contradict those that would otherwise be credited. Credit should not be
awarded for any responses that are contradicted within the rest of the response. Where two responses contradict one another, this
should be treated as a single incorrect response.
• Non-contradictory responses after the first n responses may be ignored even if they include incorrect science.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2024 Page 3 of 9
9702/52 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme February/March 2024
PUBLISHED
6 Calculation specific guidance
Correct answers to calculations should be given full credit even if there is no working or incorrect working, unless the question states ‘show
your working’.
For questions in which the number of significant figures required is not stated, credit should be awarded for correct answers when rounded
by the examiner to the number of significant figures given in the mark scheme. This may not apply to measured values.
For answers given in standard form (e.g. a  10n) in which the convention of restricting the value of the coefficient (a) to a value between 1
and 10 is not followed, credit may still be awarded if the answer can be converted to the answer given in the mark scheme.
Unless a separate mark is given for a unit, a missing or incorrect unit will normally mean that the final calculation mark is not awarded.
Exceptions to this general principle will be noted in the mark scheme.
7 Guidance for chemical equations
Multiples / fractions of coefficients used in chemical equations are acceptable unless stated otherwise in the mark scheme.
State symbols given in an equation should be ignored unless asked for in the question or stated otherwise in the mark scheme.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2024 Page 4 of 9
9702/52 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme February/March 2024
PUBLISHED
Question Answer Marks
1 Defining the problem
L is the independent variable and f is the dependent variable, or vary L and measure f. 1
Keep  constant 1
Methods of data collection
Labelled diagram of workable experiment including: 1
• rod supported by string / elastic bands from a clamp
• clamp attached to stand, with stand on bench
• two labels from stand, clamp, hammer, microphone, rod, string.
Diagram showing labelled microphone connected to labelled oscilloscope. 1
Method to measure L, e.g. use a metre rule 1
Method to measure mass (m) (of metal rod), e.g. use a (top-pan) balance 1
Method of Analysis
1 1
Plots a graph of log f against log L or equivalent e.g. log f against log
L
n = − gradient 1
1
(for log f against log : n = gradient)
L
E =4102y-intercept 1
1
(for lg f vs lg : E =4102y-intercept)
L
(for ln f against ln L; E =4e2y-intercept)
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2024 Page 5 of 9
9702/52 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme February/March 2024
PUBLISHED
Question Answer Marks
1 Additional detail including safety considerations 6
Any six from:
D1 Precaution linked to falling rod, e.g. sand tray / cushion (in case rod falls) OR gently hit rod prevent rod falling
D2 Method to determine area of rod (A) e.g. measure diameter (d) of rod using a micrometer / calipers
D3 Repeat measurements of diameter along the length of rod / around the rod and average diameter
m d2
D4 Method to determine ρ from experimental method, e.g. = and A =
AL 4
4m
or =
d2L
d m
or r = and =
2 r2L
D5 Perform experiment in a quiet room
D6 Reasoned method to prevent rod hitting microphone, e.g. have a gap between rod and microphone / gently hit rod or
method to obtain measurable signal from the microphone, e.g. use a cone to increase the sound detected by the
microphone
D7 Method to determine frequency from oscilloscope, e.g. T = time-base  (horizontal) length (of one wave)
and f = 1/T
D8 Method to reduce uncertainties e.g.
use large values of L to reduce (percentage) uncertainty in L
or
adjust time-base to display as few waves as possible or Z waves on oscilloscope and divide time by Z
or
wait for the wave(form) / frequency to stabilise (and reach resonance)
D9 Repeat measurements of f for each value of L and average f
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2024 Page 6 of 9
9702/52 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme February/March 2024
PUBLISHED
Question Answer Marks
1 1 E  1  E 
D10 Relationship is valid if a straight line is produced (passing through log  OR log ).
2  2  4
   
Do not accept passing through the origin.
Question Answer Marks
2(a) 3 1
Gradient =
E
4Z
y-intercept =
E
2(b) 1
1
/ A−1
I
4440 or 4444
5410 or 5405
6250 or 6250
7140 or 7143
8000 or 8000
8700 or 8696
1 1
Uncertainties in
I
From  90–110 to  360–400
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2024 Page 7 of 9
9702/52 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme February/March 2024
PUBLISHED
Question Answer Marks
2(c)(i) Six points from (b) plotted correctly. 1
Must be within half a small square. Diameter of points must be less than half a small square.
1 1
Error bars in plotted correctly.
I
All error bars to be plotted. Total length of bar must be accurate to less than half a small square and symmetrical.
2(c)(ii) Straight line of best fit drawn. 1
Do not accept line from top plot to bottom plot.
Points must be balanced.
Line must pass between (1.8, 5000) and (2.1, 5000) and between (7.2, 8500) and (7.5, 8500)
Worst acceptable line drawn. 1
Steepest or shallowest possible line that passes through all the error bars.
All error bars must be plotted.
2(c)(iii) Gradient determined with clear substitution of data points into y / x; distance between data points must be greater than 1
half the length of the drawn line.
Gradient determined of worst acceptable line with clear substitution of data points into y / x; 1
uncertainty = (gradient of line of best fit – gradient of worst acceptable line)
or
uncertainty = ½ (steepest worst line gradient – shallowest worst line gradient)
2(c)(iv) y-intercept determined by substitution of correct point with consistent power of ten in m and x into y = mx + c 1
y-intercept of worst acceptable line determined by substitution into y = mx + c 1
uncertainty = y-intercept of line of best fit – y-intercept of worst acceptable line, or
uncertainty = ½ (steepest worst line y-intercept – shallowest worst line y-intercept)
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2024 Page 8 of 9
9702/52 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme February/March 2024
PUBLISHED
Question Answer Marks
2(d)(i) E determined using gradient and 1
E and Z given to 2, 3 or 4 sf.
3
E =
gradient
Z determined using y-intercept and 1
E and Z given with SI units with correct powers of ten
Ey-intercept 3  y-intercept
Z = or Z =
4 4  gradient
Unit of E: V or A 
Unit of Z: 
2(d)(ii) Percentage uncertainty in Z with method shown. 1
 gradient y-intercept
%uncertainty= + 
 gradient y-intercept 
or
Correct substitution for max/min methods.
2(e) R determined to a minimum of 2sf from (c)(iii) and (c)(iv) or (d)(i) with correct substitution and correct powers of ten. 1
0.1 mA = 0.1  10–3 A and
1
− y-intercept
0.1010−3
R = or
gradient
E 4Z
R = −
30.1010−3 3
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2024 Page 9 of 9
