Cambridge International AS & A Level
PHYSICS 9702/51
Paper 5 Planning, Analysis and Evaluation May/June 2020
MARK SCHEME
Maximum Mark: 30
Published
Students did not sit exam papers in the June 2020 series due to the Covid-19 global pandemic.
This mark scheme is published to support teachers and students and should be read together with the
question paper. It shows the requirements of the exam. The answer column of the mark scheme shows the
proposed basis on which Examiners would award marks for this exam. Where appropriate, this column also
provides the most likely acceptable alternative responses expected from students. Examiners usually review
the mark scheme after they have seen student responses and update the mark scheme if appropriate. In the
June series, Examiners were unable to consider the acceptability of alternative responses, as there were no
student responses to consider.
Mark schemes should usually be read together with the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. However,
because students did not sit exam papers, there is no Principal Examiner Report for Teachers for the June
2020 series.
Cambridge International will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes.
Cambridge International is publishing the mark schemes for the June 2020 series for most Cambridge
IGCSE™ and Cambridge International A & AS Level components, and some Cambridge O Level
components.
This document consists of 11 printed pages.
© UCLES 2020 [Turn over
9702/51 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme May/June 2020
PUBLISHED
Generic Marking Principles
These general marking principles must be applied by all examiners when marking candidate answers. They should be applied alongside the
specific content of the mark scheme or generic level descriptors for a question. Each question paper and mark scheme will also comply with these
marking principles.
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 1:
Marks must be awarded in line with:
• the specific content of the mark scheme or the generic level descriptors for the question
• the specific skills defined in the mark scheme or in the generic level descriptors for the question
• the standard of response required by a candidate as exemplified by the standardisation scripts.
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 2:
Marks awarded are always whole marks (not half marks, or other fractions).
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 3:
Marks must be awarded positively:
• marks are awarded for correct/valid answers, as defined in the mark scheme. However, credit is given for valid answers which go beyond the
scope of the syllabus and mark scheme, referring to your Team Leader as appropriate
• marks are awarded when candidates clearly demonstrate what they know and can do
• marks are not deducted for errors
• marks are not deducted for omissions
• answers should only be judged on the quality of spelling, punctuation and grammar when these features are specifically assessed by the
question as indicated by the mark scheme. The meaning, however, should be unambiguous.
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 4:
Rules must be applied consistently e.g. in situations where candidates have not followed instructions or in the application of generic level
descriptors.
© UCLES 2020 Page 2 of 11
9702/51 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme May/June 2020
PUBLISHED
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 5:
Marks should be awarded using the full range of marks defined in the mark scheme for the question (however; the use of the full mark range may
be limited according to the quality of the candidate responses seen).
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 6:
Marks awarded are based solely on the requirements as defined in the mark scheme. Marks should not be awarded with grade thresholds or
grade descriptors in mind.
© UCLES 2020 Page 3 of 11
9702/51 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme May/June 2020
PUBLISHED
Science-Specific Marking Principles
1 Examiners should consider the context and scientific use of any keywords when awarding marks. Although keywords may be present, marks
should not be awarded if the keywords are used incorrectly.
2 The examiner should not choose between contradictory statements given in the same question part, and credit should not be awarded for
any correct statement that is contradicted within the same question part. Wrong science that is irrelevant to the question should be ignored.
3 Although spellings do not have to be correct, spellings of syllabus terms must allow for clear and unambiguous separation from other
syllabus terms with which they may be confused (e.g. ethane / ethene, glucagon / glycogen, refraction / reflection).
4 The error carried forward (ecf) principle should be applied, where appropriate. If an incorrect answer is subsequently used in a scientifically
correct way, the candidate should be awarded these subsequent marking points. Further guidance will be included in the mark scheme
where necessary and any exceptions to this general principle will be noted.
5 ‘List rule’ guidance
For questions that require n responses (e.g. State two reasons …):
• The response should be read as continuous prose, even when numbered answer spaces are provided
• Any response marked ignore in the mark scheme should not count towards n
• Incorrect responses should not be awarded credit but will still count towards n
• Read the entire response to check for any responses that contradict those that would otherwise be credited. Credit should not be
awarded for any responses that are contradicted within the rest of the response. Where two responses contradict one another, this
should be treated as a single incorrect response
• Non-contradictory responses after the first n responses may be ignored even if they include incorrect science.
© UCLES 2020 Page 4 of 11
9702/51 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme May/June 2020
PUBLISHED
6 Calculation specific guidance
Correct answers to calculations should be given full credit even if there is no working or incorrect working, unless the question states ‘show
your working’.
For questions in which the number of significant figures required is not stated, credit should be awarded for correct answers when rounded
by the examiner to the number of significant figures given in the mark scheme. This may not apply to measured values.
For answers given in standard form, (e.g. a × 10n) in which the convention of restricting the value of the coefficient (a) to a value between 1
and 10 is not followed, credit may still be awarded if the answer can be converted to the answer given in the mark scheme.
Unless a separate mark is given for a unit, a missing or incorrect unit will normally mean that the final calculation mark is not awarded.
Exceptions to this general principle will be noted in the mark scheme.
7 Guidance for chemical equations
Multiples / fractions of coefficients used in chemical equations are acceptable unless stated otherwise in the mark scheme.
State symbols given in an equation should be ignored unless asked for in the question or stated otherwise in the mark scheme.
© UCLES 2020 Page 5 of 11
9702/51 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme May/June 2020
PUBLISHED
Annotations
 Correct point
Method of analysis marks in Question 1
 Additional detail marks in Question 1
1–10
X Incorrect point
^ Omission
BOD Benefit of the doubt
NBOD No benefit of the doubt given
ECF Error carried forward
P Defining the problem marks in Question 1
Power of ten error in Question 2
M0 Methods of data collection marks in Question 1
© UCLES 2020 Page 6 of 11
9702/51 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme May/June 2020
PUBLISHED
Question Answer Marks
1 Defining the problem
A is the independent variable and k is the dependent variable or vary A and measure k 1
keep N constant 1
Methods of data collection
labelled diagram of workable experiment including: 1
• spring fixed at one end to a support
• load attached to the other end of the spring
• labelled load
method to measure mass or weight of load: use top-pan balance to measure mass or newton meter to measure weight 1
use of a micrometer/calipers to determine t and rule/calipers to measure the diameter of the spring 1
method to measure extension, e.g. labelled ruler drawn parallel to spring, equilibrium position and displaced position 1
indicated and x indicated or description of use of ruler to measure equilibrium position and displaced position and
difference determined
Method of analysis
plot a graph of k against 1/A3/2 (or A–3/2) or equivalent e.g. lg k against lg A 1
relationship valid if a straight line passing through the origin is produced 1
(for lg k against lg A, relationship valid if a straight line with gradient –3/2)
gradient×N 1
β=
ρt4
[for lg k against lg A, β = 10y-intercept × N / (ρt4) ]
© UCLES 2020 Page 7 of 11
9702/51 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme May/June 2020
PUBLISHED
Question Answer Marks
1 Additional detail including safety considerations 6
D1 use safety goggles/safety screen to prevent injury to eyes from (moving) spring/load
or
use cushion/sand box in case load falls
D2 keep t constant
mg F
D3 k = or
x x
D4 use of set square when taking measurements to determine extension of spring
D5 repeat measurement of t along wire/spring and average
D6 repeat measurement of diameter D of spring (to determine A) in different directions and average
πD2
D7 use of A=
4
D8 method to ensure clamped rule to measure extension is vertical, e.g. correctly positioned set square indicated at right
angles between the rule and the horizontal surface or plumb line shown in appropriate position
D9 method to determine the density of the wire
or
additional detail on construction of coil
D10 method to determine the mean diameter of the spring, e.g. subtract t from external diameter of spring
© UCLES 2020 Page 8 of 11
9702/51 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme May/June 2020
PUBLISHED
Question Answer Marks
2(a) −1 1
gradient =
CR
Q
y-intercept = ln 0
C
2(b) 1
ln (V / V)
1.82 or 1.825
1.53 or 1.526
1.22 or 1.224
0.96 or 0.956
0.69 or 0.693
0.34 or 0.336
Absolute uncertainties in ln V from ± 0.03 or ± 0.04 to ± 0.13 or ± 0.14 or ± 0.15. 1
2(c)(i) Six points plotted correctly. 1
Must be within half a small square. Diameter of points must be less than half a small square.
Error bars in ln V plotted correctly. 1
All error bars to be plotted. Length of bar must be accurate to less than half a small square and symmetrical.
2(c)(ii) Line of best fit drawn. 1
Points must be balanced. Do not accept top point to bottom point.
Line must pass between (4.0, 1.6) and (5.0, 1.6) and between (26.5, 0.5) and (28.0, 0.5)
Worst acceptable line drawn (steepest or shallowest possible line that passes through all the error bars). 1
All error bars must be plotted.
© UCLES 2020 Page 9 of 11
9702/51 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme May/June 2020
PUBLISHED
Question Answer Marks
2(c)(iii) Gradient determined with clear substitution of data points into Δy / Δx. 1
Distance between data points must be at least half the length of the drawn line.
Gradient must be negative.
uncertainty = (gradient of line of best fit – gradient of worst acceptable line) 1
or
uncertainty = ½ (steepest worst line gradient – shallowest worst line gradient)
2(c)(iv) y-intercept read from y-axis to less than half a small square 1
or
y-intercept determined from substitution into y = mx + c.
2(d)(i) C determined using gradient and C and Q given to two or three significant figures. 1
0
Correct substitution of numbers required.
−1 −1
C = =
39×103 ×gradient 39×103 ×(c)(iii)
Q determined using y-intercept. 1
0
Q =C×ey-intercept =C×e(c)(iv)
0
C determined using gradient 1
and
Q determined using y-intercept
0
and
dimensionally correct units for C (F or sΩ–1) and Q (C or VsΩ–1 or As).
0
2(d)(ii) Absolute uncertainty in C. 1
 Δgradient
ΔC = 0.05+ ×C
 gradient 
© UCLES 2020 Page 10 of 11
9702/51 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme May/June 2020
PUBLISHED
Question Answer Marks
2(e) V determined from (d)(i) (or (c)(iii) and (c)(iv)) with correct substitution shown and correct power of ten. 1
V
=Q
0
×e− C6 R0
=ey-intercept
×e( gradient×60)
C
or
ln V = – (t / RC) + ln (Q /C) = – (60 / 39000) × (d)(i) + ln (Q /C)
0 0
ln V = 60 × gradient + y-intercept
ln V = 60 × (c)(iii) + (c)(iv)
© UCLES 2020 Page 11 of 11
